---
title: "Hunger"
date: 2026-05-10T09:01:54-04:00
draft: false
---

On hunger
Following Singapore’s news cycle seems like the sensible thing to do for anyone concerned about our country’s future but the experience is undeniably an exercise in humiliation. The writing is so amateurish that reading it feels like pulling teeth, and the topics covered range from completely inane to downright absurd. For example, I spent the past week learning about [government-backed dating apps](https://www.straitstimes.com/life/govtech-seeking-feedback-on-a-dating-service-with-free-meals-and-singpass-verification) and plans to [standardize disciplinary standards for 9-year-olds](https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/parenting-education/new-bullying-standards-a-good-start-but-parents-hope-for-more-restoration-and-safety-for-victims). You’d be hard pressed to find a reasonable person who’d consider that a good use of time. 

However, as with all media cycles, occasionally something important does happen, making the pain of scrolling through a thousand pointless op-eds worthwhile. In this case, it was the controversy surrounding a legal recruiter’s guest appearance on [Channel News Asia’s (CNA) “Deep Dive” podcast](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1vvb8dVGhgk). In it the recruiter, Shuling Lee, explained that many lawyers are leaving the profession because Singaporeans were not as “hungry” as their foreign counterparts. The podcast itself contained nothing of substance – I refuse to believe 30 minutes of dicking around in a studio can be considered a “Deep Dive”. But the larger issue, of young Singaporeans being constantly accused of not being “hungry” enough, is.

The term “hunger” itself is not a very coherent one. It’s often too loosely defined, a mix of ambition, extroversion, work-ethic, and increasingly “AI-readiness”, to be analytically useful, and often lumped with other buzzwords such as “multipolar world”, “disruption”, and “no free lunch” to inject listeners with a straight shot of anxiety. And while Shuling’s attempt at defining it was no less disappointing, she was more sympathetic to Singaporean workers than the online reaction suggested. She was clearly motivated by similar insecurities about AI-enabled job losses and competition from foreigners, like many other Singaporeans. However, I must mention that her main point about “AI making intelligence obsolete and ‘hunger’ being the sole differentiator” was complete nonsense. If anything, AI should make the edge from working longer hours marginal since agents can operate 24/7 given enough compute and storage. 

Podcast aside, the views expressed are not novel. Young Singaporeans are indeed constantly being accused of not being hardworking enough, of being too soft. This failing, consistently framed as a moral one, is then linked to its attendant consequence of them having their “lunch” stolen by foreigners (Side note, the use of food-associated terms like hunger and lunch instead of ideals like drive and opportunity suggests a childlike understanding of the world, which deserves more self-reflection than it currently gets). This narrative about poorer work ethic is oft-repeated in high-income countries in general, with the accompanying tagline “good times create weak men”. Ours is a society gripped by the psychosexual urge for more discipline and more punishment. To go harder so that we’ll learn to get hungrier. Yikes!

Unfortunately for everyone above the age of 40, I am not particularly convinced that Singapore’s young are not hardworking. If anything, younger Singaporeans must start working earlier and much harder than their parents did. Recruiting cycles for most corporate vocations take place more than 6 months in advance. Credentials that were once a surefire ticket to high-paying professions, such as a college degree, have been reduced to the status of a rubber stamp. These signals are now used to exclude those without rather than to elevate those with. If anything, for a child born today to make bank, they should probably be taught about Investment Banking at age 10 and be enrolled in their first internship by 15. I myself was shocked to be interning alongside such high schoolers at UChicago’s Data Science Institute. One girl in particular had already completed a software engineering internship at Citadel Securities and was due to start at Princeton that fall. You’d be hard pressed to find someone born before 2008 who has experienced remotely similar expectations. And last I checked, junior bankers are still expected to put in 100-hour weeks.

What has changed, however, are the ideals that the young aspire to, and consequently what constitutes a higher quality of life, which we’ve defined as having more leisure time. It’s puzzling to me that anyone could find this unjustified or in the least bit surprising. After all, isn’t this the point of development? The freedom to pursue a more comfortable life? Isn’t that what our parents wanted, and got, and isn’t that what we should want as well? What should a child who hardly saw their parents because of work, learnt about their dad’s affairs during “business trips”, watched their loved one develop heart conditions from years of stress, take away from that experience? That they should work more?  I mean, my dad broke his back repairing trains at SMRT, and he never once wanted the same for me. In fact, it caused him great discomfort to learn that I currently work longer hours than him. I thus have little regard for my fellow countrymen’s nitpicking. Their observations, while being accurate, are unpersuasive as critique. 

That said, the desire for more leisure does leave younger Singaporeans vulnerable to displacement by both migrant workers and automation, twin forces our parents did not have to contend with. In fact this added competition weakens the argument that the young have not encountered hardship even further. Meanwhile, it is completely understandable that migrant workers, especially those from Southeast Asia, are willing to sacrifice more and accept less to live and work in Singapore. The Singapore dollar is strong, and our infrastructure, healthcare, education, and public safety systems offer an exceptional standard of living, the value of which can only be fully appreciated by those who have experienced life without it. Indeed, I myself could not fully understand the extent of these privileges until I spent many years abroad. One could understand the differences at an analytical level by reading about them, but never intuitively, without experience, without skin-in-the-game.

This willingness to do more for less makes migrant workers natural allies with employers, whose interests are aligned. By hiring foreigners at lower costs and without any disproportionate reduction in the quantity or quality of output, Singaporean firms can extract greater surplus value. In theory, these gains could be reinvested into expanding existing businesses or starting new ventures, thus increasing the share of employment. But in practice, these gains are likely to be either [pocketed or stored in financial assets](https://hbr.org/2014/09/profits-without-prosperity), further increasing the divide between rich and poor. The “hunger” narrative is thus one the asset-rich will continue to push. And as this push continues, the middle classes, driven by status anxiety and a consequent desire for proximity to wealth and power, will [internalize it and police each other’s behavior](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10291095/), further tightening its grip on our collective consciousness. Given this economic structure, arguments about “mental health” and “burnout” are unlikely to persuade the other side.

The task of addressing this conflict inevitably falls on the government, which finds itself caught in a bit of a bind. On the one hand, the macroeconomic indicators they value: employment, GDP, productivity etc. align their interests squarely with employers. While on the other, failing to manage the risks from continued worker resentment can cost them electorally. Unfortunately for the Singaporean worker, both these forces are not equally matched. A single employer employs multiple workers and serves multiple clients, but a single worker has only one vote.

Given Singapore’s ageing population and the rising costs of healthcare and social service provision, the government will inevitably have to side with employers to keep capital flowing in. Thus, the influx of migrant workers is unlikely to subside. To placate its voters, the state must continue offering an increasing number of concessions and privileges, such as subsidies for housing, education, and healthcare, and direct cash transfers, while simultaneously tightening the requirements for citizenship and long term stays via quotas and other restrictions. 

These policies, while well-intentioned, will paradoxically strengthen the divide between foreigners and locals. For one, foreigners, increasingly resentful of the privileges afforded by citizenship, will naturally look for creative ways to work existing employment pathways to their advantage. Employers are more than willing to facilitate this. A notable example would be the [fair consideration framework](https://www.mom.gov.sg/employment-practices/fair-consideration-framework), which requires firms to advertise job postings for locals on MyCareersFuture for 14 days before applying for an EP, leading to accusations of phantom postings meant to justify the EP instead of actually hiring Singaporeans. However, it’s crucial to note that these workarounds are primarily employer-driven. While they might be tacitly supported by migrant workers, these workers would have few options to game the numbers on their own — outside of dependent passes — if employers were not playing as active a role in their recruitment.

The consequence of these allied interests will, in turn, cause consternation among working Singaporeans, as they feel increasingly marginalized in the workplace. Complaints about migrants being arrogant and condescending towards locals, or refusing to assimilate are manifestations of these feelings. But it’s important to understand that they are constructed ex-post, as a consequence of demographic and economic change, and sensitivities to an increasingly unequal distribution of power between workers and bosses. After all, Singaporeans are not upset when Bangladeshi construction workers do not speak English. This conflict will go on for a long time, since migrants are willing to pay an extraordinarily high premium to live in Singapore and Singaporeans are too apathetic to drive policy change through political mobilisation outside of elections. The winners of this struggle are employers and asset holders.

The only force capable of disrupting this cycle is nationalism. As developing nations continue to grow and achieve prosperity, they will stir optimism in their respective nation-building projects. This will pull migrants back home, for the prospect of being part of a movement bigger than one’s self, for one’s “people” no matter how dubiously constructed, has been a constant animating force throughout history. Indeed most migrants in Singapore often express resignation at how they wish “systems” back home worked as well, so that they wouldn’t have had to leave their communities behind for greater opportunity. Vietnam’s journey into a manufacturing alternative to China, Indonesia’s 8% GDP growth ambitions, and Malaysia’s tech boom are some of the pathways that, if fully realised, would reduce the incentive to migrate out of necessity.

However even this turn of events, while defusing tensions, is unlikely to improve the material circumstances of Singaporeans. Firms will either relocate or fold under rising labor costs. Thus, Singapore can have no policy answers outside of maintaining strong commercial ties with other nations and making economic linkages as “sticky” as possible. The longer-term hopes — a global normative shift away from hours-as-virtue, or an AI productivity boom large enough to fund a leisure class — are possible but highly contingent. 

Ultimately, a system that explicitly enshrines discrimination is the only option available to the PAP. In the meantime, Singaporeans will have to accept that accusations of hunger, no matter how poorly articulated or defined, will not abate. Barring a major global or regional disruption, the equilibrium is locked. Employers want it. The government needs it. Migrants accept it. And Singaporeans cannot organize against it. Until then, Singaporeans should do their best to avoid internalizing this framing of “hunger” as a moral judgement and instead focus on shifting the larger structural forces at play.
